TDL: Provide guidance for site admins w.r.t. big data (#11850)
IQSS/dataverse: doc/sphinx-guides/source/admin/big-data-administration.rst

> Scaling Dataverse with Data Size

Author: Still seems to be part of admin to me.

================================

> This guide is intended to help administrators configure Dataverse appropriately to handle the amount of data their installation needs to manage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide is intended to help administrators configure Dataverse appropriately to handle larger amounts of data.
```

Also, we could say "section" since this is already inside a guide, the Admin Guide.

Scaling is a complex subject: there are many options available in Dataverse that can improve performance with larger scale data, some of which
work differently than Dataverse's default configuration, potentially requiring user education, and some which can require additional expertise to manage.

In general, there are three dimensions in which Dataverse can scale:
  
1. **Storage size of individual files and aggregate storage size**
2. **Number of Files per Dataset**

> 3. **Number of Datasets**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Number of files per dataset**
3. **Number of datasets**
```

This matches "individual files", above, and looks more natural, in my opinion.

The primary choice in Dataverse related to storage is which type(s) of "store" (also called "Storage driver") to use:

File Stores
~~~~~~~~~~~

The default storage option in Dataverse is based on a local file system. When files are transferred to Dataverse, they are first stored in a
temporary location on the Dataverse server. Any zip files uploaded are unzipped to create multiple individual file entries. Once an upload is completed, 
Dataverse copies the files to permanent storage. Dataverse also takes advantage of the file being local to inspect it's bytes to determine it's 
MIME type, and, for tabular data, to 'ingest' it - extracting metadata about the variables used in the file and creating a tab-separated value (TSV)
version of the file.

Benefits: 

- This option requires no external services and can potentially handle files into the gigabyte (GB) size range. For smaller institutions,
  and in disciplines where datasets do not have more than a few hundred files and files are not too large, this can be the simplest option.
- Unzipping of zip archives can be simpler for users than having to upload many individual files and was, at one time, the only way to 

>   preserve file path names when uploading.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Unzipping of zip archives can be simpler for users than having to upload many individual files and was, at one time, the only way to 
  preserve file path names when uploading. In addition, some of the unzipped files might be in a format that can be previewed or otherwise acted upon.
```

We could link to the file handling docs: https://guides.dataverse.org/en/6.8/user/dataset-management.html#file-handling

- Because all uploads use the same temporary storage, temporary storage must be large enough to handle multiple users uploading data.
- Each file is uploaded as a single HTTP request, which can cause long transfer times which, in turn, can trigger timeout errors in Dataverse or any proxy or load balancer in front of Dataverse.
- Uploading many files at once can trigger any rate limiter in front of the Dataverse server (i.e. used to throttle use by AI) resulting in failures
- Because transfers (both uploads and downloads) are handled by the Dataverse server, they add to server processing load which can affect overall performance.
- Cost: local file storage must be provisioned in advance based on anticipated demand. It can involve up-front costs (for a local disk), or, when procured from a 
  cloud provider, is likely to be more expensive than object storage from that provider (see below) 

S3 Stores: Object Storage via S3
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A more scalable option for storage is to use an object store with transfers managed using the Simple Storage Service (S3) protocol. S3-compatible storage can 

> easily be bought (rented) from major cloud providers, but may also be available from institutional clouds. It is also possible to run open-source software to provide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
easily be bought (rented) from major cloud providers, but may also be available from institutional clouds. It is also possible to run open source software to provide
```

https://opensource.org/blog/is-open-source-ever-hyphenated

S3 storage over a local file system (making it possible to enjoy the advantages discussed below while still leveraging local file storage). 

While S3 Stores can be configured to handle uploads and downloads as with file storage (with zip files being unzipped, but having many of the same challenges in terms of temporary storage and server load as discussed above) 
they can also be configured to use 'direct' upload and download. In this configuration, the actual transfer of file bytes is from/to the user's local machine to/from

> the S3 store. In this configuration, files are never stored on the Dataverse server, and Dataverse does not attempt to unzip zip files and they are stored as a single file in the dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While S3 Stores can be configured to handle uploads and downloads as with file storage (with zip files being unzipped, but having many of the same challenges in terms of temporary storage and server load as discussed above) 
they can also be configured to use "direct" upload and download. In this configuration, the actual transfer of file bytes is between the user's local machine and
the S3 store. In this configuration, files are never stored on the Dataverse server. Dataverse does not attempt to unzip zip files, and they are stored as a single file in the dataset.
```

  standard upload interface in Dataverse (which also does not retain path information)).
- The following features are disabled when S3 direct upload is enabled.
  - Unzipping of zip files. (See :ref:`compressed-files`.)
  - Detection of file type based on JHOVE and custom code that reads the first few bytes except for the refinement of Stata file types to include the version. (See :ref:`redetect-file-type`.)
  - Extraction of metadata from FITS files. (See :ref:`fits`.)
  - Creation of NcML auxiliary files (See :ref:`netcdf-and-hdf5`.)
  - Extraction of a geospatial bounding box from NetCDF and HDF5 files (see :ref:`netcdf-and-hdf5`) unless :ref:`dataverse.netcdf.geo-extract-s3-direct-upload` is set to true.

- Using direct upload stops Dataverse from inspecting the file bytes to determine the MIME type (with one exception - Stata files). Dataverse will still look at the file name and extension to determine the MIME type.
- To perform the 'ingest' processing, Dataverse currently has to copy the file to local storage, somewhat negating the benefit of sending data directly to S3. To manage larger files, one can set a per-store

>   ingest size limit (which can be 0 bytes) to stop ingest or limit it to smaller files. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To perform "ingest" processing, Dataverse currently has to copy the file to local storage, negating the benefit of sending data directly to S3. To manage larger files, one can set a per-store
  ingest size limit (which can be 0 bytes) to stop ingest or limit it to smaller files. 
```

We could link to https://guides.dataverse.org/en/6.8/user/tabulardataingest/index.html and https://guides.dataverse.org/en/6.8/installation/config.html#tabularingestsizelimit

- Dataverse's mechanism for downloading a whole dataset or multiple selected files involves zipping those files together. Even When using S3 with direct upload/download,
  the file bytes are transferred to the Dataverse server as part of the zipping process. There are ways to reduce the performance impact of this:

>   - There is a 'ZipDownloader' app that can be run separate from Dataverse to handle the zipping process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - There is a "ZipDownloader" app that can be run separate from Dataverse to handle the zipping process.
```

Let's link to it. I assume you're talking about this: https://guides.dataverse.org/en/6.8/installation/advanced.html#standalone-zipper-service-tool

>   - Dataverse has a :ZipDownloadLimit that can be used to limit the amount of data that can be zipped. If a dataset is larger than this limit, Dataverse will only add some of the files to the zip and list others in the included manifest file.

Reviewer: It would be nice to link to it.

  - There are tools such as the Dataverse Dataset Downloader (https://github.com/gdcc/dataverse-recipes/tree/main/shell/download#dataverse-dataset-downloader) that can be used to download all off the files individually. This avoids sending any of the files to/through the Dataverse server when S3 direct download is enabled.  

> - Dataverse leverages S3 features that are not implemented by all servers and has several configuration options geared towards handling variations between servers. Site admins should be sure to test with their preferred S3 implementation.

Author: I linked to the list.

In the most basic configuration a site administrator configures the base URL for the store, e.g. "https://thirdpartystorage.edu/long-term-storage/" 
and users can then create files referencing any URL starting with that base, e.g. "https://thirdpartystorage.edu/long-term-storage/my_project_dir/my_file.txt".

If the remote site is a public web server, the remote store in Dataverse should be configured to be 'public' which will disable the ability to restrict
or embargo files (as they are public on the remote site and Dataverse cannot block access.) Conversely, Dataverse can be configured to sign requests to the 
remote server which the remote server can then, if it is capable of validating them, use to reject requests not approved by Dataverse. In this configuration,
users can restrict and embargo files and Dataverse and the remote server will cooperate to manage access control. Another alternative, with a more advanced
remote store, would be, instead of using URLs that directly enable download of the file, to use URLs that point to a landing page at the remote server that 

> may require the user to login, or go through some other authentication/validation process before being able to access the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
may require the user to login, or go through some other authentication process before being able to access the file.
```

Author: changed wording

Benefits: 

- This is a relatively simple way to off-load the management of large and/or sensitive data files to other organizations while still providing Dataverse's overall capabilities for dataset curation and publication to users.   
- If the store has been configured with a remote-store-name or remote-store-url, the dataset file table will include this information for remote files. These provide a visual indicator that the files are not managed directly by Dataverse and are stored/managed by a remote trusted store.

Challenges:

- Currently, remote files can only be added via the API. (This may be addressed in future versions).
- Remote files can only be added after the dataset is created in the UI (and therefore has an id and PID for use with the API). However, the UI will still allow upload of files to the base store (at dataset creation and when editing), which could be confusing.
- As Dataverse is relying on the remote service to maintain the integrity and availability of the files, it is likely that the Dataverse site admin will want to have a formal agreement with the remote service 

>   operator about their policies.

Reviewer: I would put this one first. Originally Dataverse was an archive. We resisted trusting some other system to house the data.

- Site admins need to consider carefully how to configure file size limits, ingest size limits, etc. on the remote store and it's base store, and whether the remote store is public-only, and whether files there can be read by Dataverse to assure the
  requirements of a specific use case(s) are addressed.

> - The current remote store implementation will not prevent you from providing a relative URL that results in a 404 when resolved. (I.e. if you make a typo). You should check to make sure the file exists at the location you specify - by trying to download in Dataverse, by checking to see that Dataverse was able to get the file size (which it does by doing a HEAD call to that location), or just manually trying the URL in your browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The current remote store implementation will not prevent you from providing a relative URL that results in a 404 when resolved (i.e. if you make a typo). You should check to make sure the file exists at the location you specify - by trying to download in Dataverse, by checking to see that Dataverse was able to get the file size (which it does with a HEAD call to that location), or just manually trying the URL in your browser.
```

- For large files, direct-download should always be used with a remote store. (Otherwise the Dataverse will be involved in the download.)
- When multiple files are selected for download, Dataverse will try to include remote files in the zip file being created (up to the max zip size limit) which is inefficient, and will not be able to include remote files that are inaccessible (possibly confusing). 

Globus Stores: Globus Transfer between Large File/Tape Archives
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Note: Globus Transfer is still experimental: feedback is welcome! See :ref:`support`.

`Globus <https://www.globus.org>`_ provides file transfer service that is widely used for the world's largest datasets (in terms of both file size and number of files). It provides:

- robust file transfer capable of handling delays (e.g. due to the time it takes to mount tapes) and restarting after network or endpoint failures
- rapid parallel file transfers, potentially between clusters of computers on both ends

> - third-party transfer, which enables a user working with their desktop browser to initiate transfer of files from one remote endpoint (i.e. on a local high-performance computing cluster) to/from another (e.g. one associated with a Dataverse store)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Robust file transfer capable of handling delays (e.g. due to the time it takes to mount tapes) and restarting after network or endpoint failures
- Rapid parallel file transfers, potentially between clusters of computers on both ends
- Third-party transfer, which enables a user working with their desktop browser to initiate transfer of files from one remote endpoint (i.e. on a local high-performance computing cluster) to another (e.g. one associated with a Dataverse store)
```

For consistency, I'd suggest capitalizing each bullet, like the other bullets in this doc.

Dataverse can be configured to support Globus transfers in multiple ways:

- A Dataverse-managed Globus File Endpoint: Dataverse controls user access to the endpoint, access is only via Globus
- A Dataverse-managed Globus S3 Endpoint: Dataverse controls user access to the endpoint, access is available via S3 and via Globus
- A Globus Endpoint treated as Remote Storage: Dataverse references files on a Globus endpoint managed by a third party

Benefits: 

- Globus scales to higher data volumes than any other option. Users working with large data are often familiar with Globus and are interested in transferring data to/from computational clusters rather than their local machine
- Globus transfers can be initiated by choosing the Globus option in the dataset upload panel. Analogously, "Globus Transfer" is one of the download options in the "Access Dataset" menu.

> - For the non-S3 options, Dataverse supports having a base store (e.g. a local file system or an S3-based store), which can be used internally by Dataverse (e.g. for thumbnails, etc.) and can allow users to upload smaller files (e.g. Readmes, documentation) that might not be suited to a given Globus endpoint (e.g. a tape store)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For the non-S3 options, Dataverse supports having a base store (e.g. a local file system or an S3-based store), which can be used internally by Dataverse (e.g. for thumbnails, etc.) and can allow users to upload smaller files (e.g. READMEs, documentation) that might not be suited to a given Globus endpoint (e.g. a tape store).
```

- For users not familiar with Globus, managing transfers can be confusing. For the non-S3 options, users cannot just download files - they must have access to a destination Globus endpoint and have a Globus account. Globus does provide free accounts and a free 'Globus Personal Connect' service which installed on any machine to allow transfers to/from it.
- Globus transfers are not enabled at dataset-creation time. Once the draft version is created, users can initiate Globus transfers to upload files from remote endpoints.
- For Dataverse-managed endpoints, a community-developed `dataverse-globus <https://github.com/scholarsportal/dataverse-globus>`_ app must be installed and configured in the Dataverse instance. 
  This app manages granting and revoking access for users to upload/download files from Dataverse and handles the translation between Dataverse's internal file naming/organization to that see by the user.
- Users familiar with Globus sometimes expect to be able to find the Dataverse endpoint in Globus' online service and download files from there. Due to the fact that Dataverse is managing permissions and handling file naming, this doesn't work.

> - Due to differences between Dataverse's and Globus's access control models, Dataverse cannot enforce per-file-access restrictions - restriction can only be done today at the level of providing access to all files in a dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Due to differences between Dataverse's and Globus's access control models, Dataverse cannot enforce per-file access restrictions - restriction can only be done today at the level of providing access to all files in a dataset.
```

  Globus stores can be defined as public to disable Dataverse's ability to restrict and embargo files in that store. If the store is configured to support restriction and embargo,
  Dataverse and its Dataverse-Globus app will limit users to downloading only the files they have been granted access to, but a technically knowledgeable user could access other files in the same dataset if they are give access to one.
  (Data depositors would need to be aware of this limitation and could be guided to restrict all files/only grant access to all dataset files in Globus as a work-around).

> - Dataverse-managed endpoints must be Globus 'guest collections' hosted on either a file-system-based endpoint or an S3-based endpoint (the latter requires use of the Globus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Dataverse-managed endpoints must be Globus "guest collections" hosted on either a file-system-based endpoint or an S3-based endpoint (the latter requires use of the Globus
```

  S3 connector which requires a paid Globus subscription at the host institution). In either case, Dataverse is configured with the Globus credentials of a user account that can manage the endpoint.
  Users will need their own Globus account, which can be obtained via their institution or directly from Globus (at no cost).
- With the file-system endpoint, Dataverse does not currently have access to the file contents. Thus, functionality related to ingest, previews, fixity hash validation, etc. are not available. 
  (Using the S3-based endpoint, Dataverse has access via S3 and all functionality normally associated with direct uploads to S3 is available. In this case admins should be sure to set the maximum size for ingest and avoid requiring hash validation at publication, etc.)
- For the reference use case, Dataverse must be configured with a list of allowed endpoint/base paths from which files may be referenced. In this case, since Dataverse is not accessing the remote endpoint itself, it does not need Globus credentials. 

>   Users will also need a Globus account in this case, and the remote endpoint must be configured to allow them access (i.e. be publicly readable, or potentially involving some out-of-band mechanism to request access (that could be described, for example, in the dataset's Terms of Use and Access).

Reviewer: A closing `)` is missing somewhere.

- As with remote stores, files can only be added in the Globus reference case via the Dataverse API.
- While Globus itself can handle many (millions of) files of any size, Dataverse cannot handle more than thousands of files per dataset (at best) and some Globus endpoints may have limits on file sizes - both maximums and minimums (e.g. for tape storage where small files are inefficient).

>   Users will need to be made aware of these limitations and the possibilities for managing them (e.g. by aggregating multiple files in a single larger file, or storing smaller files in the base-store via the normal Dataverse upload UI).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Users will need to be made aware of these limitations and the possibilities for managing them (e.g. by aggregating multiple files in a single, larger zip file, or storing smaller files in the base-store via the normal Dataverse upload UI).
```

Avoiding Many Files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Before describing things that can be done to improve scaling, it is important to note that there are configuration options and best practices to suggest to users to help avoid larger datasets and and help them avoid hitting performance issues by going beyond the file counts you know work in your instance.

There are a number of settings to limit how many files can be uploaded (see :ref:`database-settings` and :ref:`jvm-options` for more details):

- ZipUploadFilesLimit - the maximum number of files allowed in an uploaded zip file - only relevant for file stores and S3 when direct upload is not used.
- MultipleUploadFilesLimit - the number of files the GUI user is allowed to upload in one batch, via drag-and-drop, or through the file select dialog
- MaxFileUploadSizeInBytes - limit the size of files that can be uploaded
- UseStorageQuotas - once enabled, super users can set per-collection quotas (in bytes) to limit the aggregate size of all files in the collection
- dataverse.files.default-dataset-file-count-limit - directly limits the number of files per dataset, can be changed per dataset via API (by super users)

> Ways to Scale

Reviewer: The anchor is big-data-administration.html#ways-to-scale

It might be better to have an anchor that's more particular to this section.

Author: Changed to Scaling-related Configuration

~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are a broad range of options (that are not turned on by default) for improving how well Solr indexing and searching scales and for handling more files per dataset. Some of these are useful for all installations while others are related to specific use cases, or are mostly for emergency use (e.g. disabling facets).
(see :ref:`database-settings`, :ref:`jvm-options`, and :ref:`feature-flags` for more details):

- dataverse.feature.add-publicobject-solr-field=true - specifically marks unrestricted content as public in solr
- dataverse.feature.avoid-expensive-solr-join=true - this tells Dataverse to use the feature above to speed searches

> - dataverse.feature.reduce-solr-deletes=true - when solr entries are being updated, this avoids an unnecessary step (deletion of existing entries) for entries that are being replaced

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- dataverse.feature.reduce-solr-deletes=true - when Solr entries are being updated, this avoids an unnecessary step (deletion of existing entries) for entries that are being replaced
```

- dataverse.feature.disable-dataset-thumbnail-autoselect=true - by default, Dataverse scans through all files in a dataset to find one that can be used as a thumbnail, which is expensive for many files. This disables that behavior to improve performance
- dataverse.feature.only-update-datacite-when-needed=true - reduces the load on DataCite and reduces Dataverse failures related to that load, which is important when using file PIDs on Datasets with many files
- v6.9: dataverse.solr.min-files-to-use-proxy=<X> - improve performance/lower memory requirements when indexing datasets with many files, suggested value is in the range 200 to 500
- dataverse.solr.concurrency.max-async-indexes=<X> - limits the number of index operations running in parallel. The default is 4, larger values may improve performance (if the Solr intance is appropriately sized)

> - v6.9?: dataverse.exports.schema-dot-org.max-files-for-download-entries - reduces the size of the schema.org metadata export wehn there are many files per dataset. By default, this is included in the dataset page header, so the smaller version improves page loading and can avoid issues with Google indexing (datasets with thousands of files+)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- v6.9?: dataverse.exports.schema-dot-org.max-files-for-download-entries - reduces the size of the schema.org metadata export when there are many files per dataset. By default, this is included in the dataset page header, so the smaller version improves page loading and can avoid issues with Google indexing (datasets with thousands of files+)
```

Also, can we remove v6.9?

- SolrFullTextIndexing - false improves performance at the expense of not indexing file contents
- SolrMaxFileSizeForFullTextIndexing - size in bytes (default unset/no limit) above which file contents should not be indexed
- ZipDownloadLimit - the maximum size in bytes for zipped downloads of files from a dataset. If the size of requested files is larger, some files will be omitted and listedin the zip manifest file as not included.

> - DatasetChecksumValidationSizeLimit - by default, Dataverse checks fixity (assuring the file contents match the recorded checksum) as part of publication. This setting specifies a maximum aggregate dataset size, above which validation will not be done.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- DatasetChecksumValidationSizeLimit - by default, Dataverse checks fixity (assuring the file contents match the recorded checksum) as part of publication. This setting specifies a maximum aggregate dataset size, above which this validation will not be done.
```

- DataFileChecksumValidationSizeLimit - by default, Dataverse checks fixity (assuring the file contents match the recorded checksum) as part of publication. This setting specifies a maximum file size, above which validation will not be done.

> - FilePIDsEnabled - false is recommended when datasets have many files. Related settings allow file PIDS to be enabled/disabled per collection and per file

Author: no - per dataset - sorry

> - CustomZipDownloadServiceUrl - allows use of a separate process/machine to handle zipping up multi-file downloads. Requires installation of the separate Zip Download app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- CustomZipDownloadServiceUrl - allows use of a separate process/machine to handle zipping up multi-file downloads. Requires installation of the separate Zip Download app
```

for consistency

- WebloaderUrl - enables use of an installed DVWebloader (by specifying it's web location) which is more efficient for uploading many files 
- CategoryOrder - Pre-sorts the file display by category, e.g. showing all "Documentation" files before "Data" files. Any user selected sorting by name, age, or size is done within these sections  
- OrderByFolder - pre-sorts files by their directory Label (folder), showing files with no path before others. Any user selected sorting by name, age, or size is done within these sections
- DisableSolrFacets - disables facets, which are costly to generate, in search results (including the main collection page)
- DisableSolrFacetsForGuestUsers - only disable facets for guests
- DisableSolrFacetsWithoutJsession - disables facets for users who have disabled cookies (e.g. for bots)

> - DisableUncheckedTypesFacet -only disables the facet showing the number of collections, datasets, files matching the query (this facet is potentially less useful than others)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- DisableUncheckedTypesFacet - only disables the facet showing the number of collections, datasets, files matching the query (this facet is potentially less useful than others)
```

Scaling Infrastructure
----------------------

There is no well-defined cut-off in terms of files per dataset or number of datasets where the Dataverse software will fail. In general the speed of viewing and editing a large dataset will decrease as the volume of datasets and files increases.
For a given installation, at some point, Dataverse will need more memory than is available, or will max out the CPU or other resources and  performance may decline dramatically.

In such cases:

- Consider increasing the memory available to Dataverse (the Java heap size for the Payara instance)
- Consider a larger machine (more CPU resources)
- Verify that performance isn't being limited by Solr or Postgres
- Investigate performance tuning options for Payara, Solr, and Postgres
- Coordinate with others in the community - there is a lot of aggregate knowledge
- Consider contributing to software design changes - Dataverse scaling has improved dramatically over the past several years, but more can be done

> - Watch for the new single page application (SPA) front-end for Dataverse. It includes features such as infinite scrolling through files with much faster initial page load times 

Author: Seems like something to keep centralized?
